README.md, before:

# Collaborative Transactions Protocol

Generalization of [Chaumian CoinJoins](https://github.com/nopara73/ZeroLink/).

## Overview

The protocol consists of epochs, rounds and phases.

![](https://i.imgur.com/d5mOgVG.png)

**Input Registration Phase**, **Output Registration Phase** and **Signing Phase** follow each other and together they are called the **Main Round**.

**Input Registration Phase** cannot fail, because inputs can be refused or kicked out of the round without penalty before moving on to **Output Registration Phase**. Regardless if **Output Registration Phase** succeeds or fails, the round must progress to **Signing Phase**, because penalties can only be imposed on malicious inputs and not on malicious outputs. If **Signing Phase** fails, the protocol progresses to **Blame Round**, which repeats the **Main Round** without the malicious inputs.

The **Main Round** and the potential **Blame Rounds** are called an **Epoch**.

## 1. Input Registration

Peer registers an input along with blinded blinded random certificates and ask the coordinator to sign the blind certificates. The certificates must follow 1-2-5 series. 

### Examples

For example if peer registers 1BTC, then he can ask for a signature for a 1BTC certificate or can also ask for 5 signatures for 0.1BTC certificates and 1 signature for a 0.5BTC certificate.  

### Notes

Since the coordinator must communicate numerous public keys to peers, the communication overhead is large. To solve this key generators have to be utilized.

Peers can register any number of inputs, but through new anonymity network identities to avoid input linkages by the coordinator.

## 2. Payment Intent Registration

Peer registers arbitrary payment intents with his certificates.

### Examples

Peer got a 1BTC certificate and would like to send 0.1234 BTC to an address, then his payment intent would be 0.1234BTC - address and 0.8766BTC - address2.  

### 3. Signing + Blame

Transaction goes out for signing. The input that does not sign the transaction will be prohibited from further participation.

## Randomization

Randomization (along desired distributions) is crucial for number of inputs registered, certificate size requests and payment intent registrations in order to avoid patterns from emerging and as a consequence heuristics to be applied.

Commit message:

Work out Input Registration Phase

README.md, after:

# Collaborative Transactions Protocol

Generalization of [Chaumian CoinJoins](https://github.com/nopara73/ZeroLink/).

## Overview

The protocol consists of epochs, rounds and phases.

![](https://i.imgur.com/d5mOgVG.png)

**Input Registration Phase**, **Output Registration Phase** and **Signing Phase** follow each other and together they are called the **Main Round**.

**Input Registration Phase** cannot fail, because inputs can be refused or kicked out of the round without penalty before moving on to **Output Registration Phase**. Regardless if **Output Registration Phase** succeeds or fails, the round must progress to **Signing Phase**, because penalties can only be imposed on malicious inputs and not on malicious outputs. If **Signing Phase** fails, the protocol progresses to **Blame Round**, which repeats the **Main Round** without the malicious inputs.

The **Main Round** and the potential **Blame Rounds** are called an **Epoch**.

#### Phase 1: Input Registration

Peers register their inputs to the coordinator. Inputs must be registered separately through different anonymtiy network identities, unless an input's amount does not reach the minimum required amount, in which case the input can be registered together with other inputs.

The peer provides a set of inputs along with corresponding proof of ownerships and blinded tokens. These inputs must be unspent, confirmed and mature. The blinded tokens are blinded random data. These tokens must be created as follows:

- If the input sum is 10BTC, then the peer creates 10 tokens and blinds all of them for 1BTC.
- If the input sum is 100BTC, then the peer creates 10 tokens and blinds all of them for 10BTC.
- If the input sum is 90BTC, then the peer creates 90 tokens and blinds all of them for 1BTC.
- If the input sum is 990BTC, then the peer creates 180 tokens and blinds 90 of them for 10BTC and 90 of them for 1BTC.

The coordinator blindly signs the tokens and responds with the signatures.

#### Phase 2: Payment Intent Registration

Peer registers arbitrary payment intents with his certificates.

### Examples

Peer got a 1BTC certificate and would like to send 0.1234 BTC to an address, then his payment intent would be 0.1234BTC - address and 0.8766BTC - address2.  

#### Phase 3: Signing + Blame

Transaction goes out for signing. The input that does not sign the transaction will be prohibited from further participation.

## Randomization

Randomization (along desired distributions) is crucial for number of inputs registered, certificate size requests and payment intent registrations in order to avoid patterns from emerging and as a consequence heuristics to be applied.

## Research Questions

- Maximum number of tokens to be signed - computational bottleneck.
- Maximum number of tokens to be signed - network bottleneck.
- Maximum number of tokens to be signed - security bottleneck (Wagner attack.)
- Minimum required amount.
- Wagner attack.
- DoS attack.
- Sybil attack.
- Reducing network trafic by utilizing hierarchical deterministic signing key generation.
- Ensuring integrity of blind signing key - https://github.com/cashshuffle/spec/issues/22
- Scheduling.
- Timing attack.
- Preferred number series vs power of 2 vs power of 10.
- Allowing unconfirmed inputs to be registered.
- Network fees.
- Coordinator fees.
